Add the announcement for opam 2.3.0~alpha1 (#105)
ocaml/platform-blog: opam-2-3-0-alpha1.md

title: "opam 2.3.0 alpha1 release"
authors: [
  "Raja Boujbel - OCamlPro" {"mailto:raja.boujbel(à)ocamlpro.com"}

>   "Kate Deplaix - Tarides" {"mailto:kit-ty-kate(à)outlook.com"}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  "Kate Deplaix - AhRefs" {"mailto:kit-ty-kate(à)outlook.com"}
```

  "David Allsopp - Tarides" {"mailto:david(à)tarides.com"}
]
date: "2024-09-19"
--BODY--

_Feedback on this post is welcomed on [Discuss](https://discuss.ocaml.org/t/ann-opam-2-3-0-alpha1/XXXXX)!_

As mentioned in [our talk at the OCaml Workshop 2024](https://icfp24.sigplan.org/details/ocaml-2024-papers/10/Opam-2-2-and-beyond),
we decided to switch to a time-based release cycle (every 6 months), starting with opam 2.3.

As promised, we are happy to announce the first alpha release of opam 2.3.0.
You can view the full list of changes in the
[release note](https://github.com/ocaml/opam/releases/tag/2.3.0-alpha1).

This version is an alpha, we invite users to test it to spot previously
unnoticed bugs as we head towards the stable release.

## Major breaking change

> When loading a repository, opam won't automatically populate the `extra-files:` field with the files found in the `files/` directory anymore.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When loading a repository, opam won't automatically populate the `extra-files:` field with the files found in the `files/` directory anymore. This was done to add more security as the existing checksum is checked against the downloaded file.
```
Something like that, to add the information about the "why" of the change.

Author: mmh, i disagree with the reasoning here. I don't think there is any "security" reason per say for this change.
The directory are part of the opam repository or source repository already and are as checked as are the opam files.

The purpose for it is a desire for simplification and evolution to something like https://github.com/ocaml/opam/issues/5811. Removing unchecked files makes it easier to have an easily checkable `opam admin migrate-extrafiles` (https://github.com/ocaml/opam/pull/5960). Aiming to remove the extra-files is good to make the repository leaner and avoid file duplication.

Author: What about:
```suggestion
When loading a repository, opam won't automatically populate the `extra-files:` field with the files found in the `files/` directory anymore. This was done as a first step towards the removal of the `extra-files` field in the future and to simplify the opam specification where we hope the opam file to be the only thing that you have to look at when reading a package specification. The optionality of the `extra-files:` field would go against that principle.
```

Reviewer: The origin of the removal of the automation is the "security/integrity" issue: if you have a repository in the file system and the extra-file is corrupted (io or malicious), opam would load it as is, ie compute the checksum at loading and add it in the opam file. It was that behaviour that was targeted at the time.
Discussions about removing extra-files came afterwards.

Reviewer: Plus, I don't know if we decided something on removal of extra-files, it is an open discussion.

Author: > if you have a repository in the file system and the extra-file is corrupted (io or malicious)

For malicious corruption it would be much easier to simply corrupt the opam file directly instead, and for regular corruption opam files are also susceptible to that so while it reduces the surface area for potential corruption i find that reason a little light and i don't think it would be compelling enough for users to understand why this has been done.

> Discussions about removing extra-files came afterwards.

i know i know, but i think users don't care much about the original reason. It would be more interesting to give a current compelling reason for them to understand the upsides of the breaking change.

Author: > Plus, I don't know if we decided something on removal of extra-files, it is an open discussion.

Sure, fair enough. What about this instead (removed that part and added a bit about file corruption):
```suggestion
When loading a repository, opam won't automatically populate the `extra-files:` field with the files found in the `files/` directory anymore. This was done to simplify the opam specification where we hope the opam file to be the only thing that you have to look at when reading a package specification. The optionality of the `extra-files:` field goes against that principle. This change also reduces the surface area for potential file corruption as it ensures that extra-files are checked against their checksums.
```

This is a breaking change and means that if you are using the `files/` directory without the `extra-files:` field, you need to make sure that every files in that directory are listed in the `extra-files` field.
Once done the resulting opam file is backward-compatible and you don't need to worry about anything else.

If you have an opam repository, you should make sure every files are listed so every packages continue to work without any issue.

> This can be done automatically using the `opam admin update-extrafiles` command.

Reviewer 2: (I meant that the extra sentence @kit-ty-kate suggests above could then be added to this)

## Major changes

> * Silently mark packages requiring an unsupported version of opam as unavailable instead of raising an error. This means an opam repository can now allow smoother upgrade in the future where some packages can require a newer version of opam without having to fork the repository to upgrade every packages to that version like it was done for the upgrade from opam 1.2 to 2.0

Reviewer 2: I would drop the word "silently" (it sounds nefarious, which it's not):
```suggestion
* Packages requiring an unsupported version of opam are now marked unavailable, instead of causing a repository error. This means an opam repository can now allow smoother upgrade in the future where some packages can require a newer version of opam without having to fork the repository to upgrade every package to that version as was done for the upgrade from opam 1.2 to 2.0
```

> * Add a new `opam list --latests-only` option to only list the latest packages. Note that this option is sensible to the order they were given in the command line. For example: `--available --latests-only` will first list all the available packages, then choose only the latest packages in that set; while `--latests-only --available` will first lists all the latest packages, then only show the ones that are available in that set

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Add a new `opam list --latests-only` option to list only the latest versions of packages. Note that this option is respects the order options were given on the command line. For example: `--available --latests-only` will first list all the available packages, then choose only the latest packages in that set; while `--latests-only --available` will first list all the latest packages, then only show the ones that are available in that set
```

> * Fix and improve `opam install --check`. That command now checks if the whole dependency tree of the package is installed instead of only the root dependencies

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Fix and improve `opam install --check`, which now checks if the whole dependency tree of the package is installed instead of only the root dependencies
```

> * Add a new `--verbose-on` option to enable verbose mode on specified package names. *Thanks to [@desumn](https://github.com/desumn) for this contribution*

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Add a new `--verbose-on` option to enable verbose output for specified package names. *Thanks to [@desumn](https://github.com/desumn) for this contribution*
```
?

* Add a new `opam switch import --deps-only` option to install only the dependencies of the root packages listed in the opam switch export file

> * `opam switch list-available` will now not display compilers flagged with `avoid-version`/`deprecated` unless `--all` is given

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* `opam switch list-available` will now not display compilers flagged with `avoid-version`/`deprecated` unless `--all` is given, meaning that the `trunk" build of OCaml no longer appears to be the latest version
```

* `opam switch create --repos` now accepts git URLs suffixed with `.git` instead of requiring the `git+https://` protocol prefix. This is consistant with other commands such as `opam repository add`. *Thanks to [@Keryan-dev](https://github.com/Keryan-dev) for this contribution*

> * `opam switch set-invariant` now returns the actual invariant syntax expected by `--invariant`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* `opam switch set-invariant` now displays the switch invariant using the same syntax as the `--invariant` flag
```

* The `builtin-0install` solver was improved and should now be capable of being your default solver instead of `builtin-mccs+glpk`. It was previously mostly only suited for automated tasks such as Continuous Integration. If you wish to give it a try, simply call `opam option solver=builtin-0install`

> * Most unhelpful conflict messages were fixed

Reviewer 2: Is this countably "Most unhelpful" as in "most of the unhelpful conflict messages" or superlatively "Most unhelpful" as in "the worst of the unhelpful"? Is there an example we can describe?

Author: i meant the first one. I'll change that
```suggestion
* Most of the unhelpful conflict messages were fixed
```

> * Fix the value of the `arch` variable when the current OS is 32bit on a 64bit machine

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Fix the value of the `arch` variable when the current OS is 32bit on a 64bit machine (e.g. Raspberry Pi OS)
```

> * opam now fails when git submodules fails to update instead of showing a warning and ignoring the error

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* opam now fails when git submodules fail to update instead of ignoring the error and just showing a warning
```

> * opam and its libraries are now available on Windows with OCaml >= 5.0

Reviewer 2: Possibly (I think it risks confusing users when we say "opam is not available on OCaml 5" for the reverse to be assumed):

```suggestion
* opam's libraries are now compile with OCaml >= 5.0 on Windows
```

Various performance and other improvements were made and bugs were fixed.
API changes are denoted in the release note linked above.
This release also includes a handful of PRs improving the documentation and more two dozen PRs improving and extending the tests.

## Try it!

The upgrade instructions are unchanged:

1. Either from binaries: run

For Unix systems
```
bash -c "sh <(curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ocaml/opam/master/shell/install.sh) --version 2.3.0~alpha1"
```
or from PowerShell for Windows systems
```

> Invoke-Expression "& { $(Invoke-RestMethod https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ocaml/opam/master/shell/install.ps1) } -Version 2.3.0~alpha1"

Author: Tested successfully
